# Data synthesis for a U.S. Gulf of Mexico Spatial Ecosystem Model
This repository represents the data inputs, synthesis, and methods to develop a spatially-explicit U.S. Gulf-wide Ecosystem Model (USGWEM). Our  overarching objective is to support ecosystem-based fisheries management in the Gulf of Mexico (GoM). 

The USGWEM applies the Ecopath with Ecosim and Ecospace (EwE) software suite to capture trade-offs associated with trophic interactions and fishing dynamics. Each EwE module builds upon the previous ones, offering an increasingly sophisticated and comprehensive toolset for ecosystem-based management and decision-making. 
1. The **Ecopath** model is the foundation of the other two tools by parameterizing an ecosystem foodweb and quantifying the interactions of functional groups (i.e., species, age stanzas for a species, or groups of organisms that share the same function in the food web). The Ecopath model includes diet composition, production, consumption, and biomass for each group.
2. **Ecosim** simulates changes in the Ecopath model over time. The model is fitted to historical timeseries by a routine that alters the vulnerability parameters of predator-prey interactions. Future projections of the fitted model can be used to project responses to management action, fishing, and/or environmental changes.
4. **Ecospace** uses spatially explicit information about habitats, spatial-temporal environmental changes, and dispersal patterns to simulate how changes in the ecosystem (e.g., due to fishing or environmental factors) propagate through time and space. Specifically, Ecosim runs over a matrix of gridded cells to allow functional groups to move between these cells. The speed that groups move between cells is based on dispersal rates for the functional group. The impetus to move will be due to preferences for habitat, environmental drivers, (e.g., temperature, salinity, primary production), and the preferences we set for the functional groups to habitat and environmental drivers. This allows for the prediction of species distribution patterns and the impacts of spatial management measures (like Marine Protected Areas) or environmental changes (like habitat loss).

Our efforts build off of previous work to develop the U.S. Gulf-wide Ecopath with Ecosim model, detailed in [NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-SEFSC-751](https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/32348), which updated the EwE model developed by [Sagarese et al. (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2016.11.001). The Ecopath food web model includes 78 functional groups, including the following: three marine mammal groups, an aggregate seabird group, an aggregate sea turtle group, and eight elasmobranch groups, 52 fish groups (18 of which are sub-divided into multiple life stages), nine invertebrate groups, three primary producers, and one detritus. Twelve commercial fishing fleets and four recreational fishing fleets are modeled. Trophic interactions were defined according to a meta-analysis of 568 diet studies, many of which were conducted in the GoM. The Ecosim model was calibrated to biomass and catch trends estimated during the period from 1980 to 2016. Time-series of predicted biomass and catch were calibrated to estimates of stock biomass from Southeast Data Assessment and Review (SEDAR), International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), and relative abundance indices calculated from NOAA fisheries independent monitoring programs in the GoM, including the groundfish trawl survey from the Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program (SEAMAP) and the Pelagic Longline Observer Program.

This repository shows our data and synthesis to develop a USGWEM in Ecospace. It's divided into four sections: **dispersal**, **habitat**, **environmental drivers**, and **preference functions**. Data for habitat (static spatial) and environmental drivers (spatially dynamic) represent drivers in the spatially dynamic model. Preference functions define how functional groups respond to these, and dispersal define the rates functional groups can move in the model to find preferred habitats or conditions. 

### 1. Dispersal rates

### 2. Depth and habitat maps

### 3. Spatial-temporal environmental drivers

### 4. Preference functions

## Notice
This repository is a **scientific product** and is **not** official communication of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or the United States Department of Commerce. All NOAA GitHub project code is provided on an ‘as is’ basis and the user assumes responsibility for its use. Any claims against the Department of Commerce or Department of Commerce bureaus stemming from the use of this GitHub project will be governed by all applicable Federal law. Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their endorsement, recommendation or favoring by the Department of Commerce. The Department of Commerce seal and logo, or the seal and logo of a DOC bureau, shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any commercial product or activity by DOC or the United States Government.
